feat: add key insights (#8)
HPI-Information-Systems/timeeval-evaluation-paper: docs/README.md

-->

## Key Insights

The following section presents the key insights that we discovered throughout this study.

### General Findings

1. There is no one-size-fits-all solution in the set of currently available algorithms: A multivariate algorithm is necessary to detect multivariate anomalies (e.g., anomalies in the correlation of series), but a univariate algorithm is preferable for univariate data.
2. Despite that supervised algorithms use additional information during training (labels for normal *and* anomalous points), they do not achieve superior results compared to semi-supervised or even unsupervised approaches.

> 3. The most relevant scoring metric depends on the use case and what the results are expected to indicate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The most relevant scoring metric, such as AUC-ROC or AUC-PR, depends on the use case and what the results are expected to indicate.
```

4. Every anomaly detection family can be effective and there is no clear winner. Furthermore, no single algorithm achieves perfect scores leaving much room for future work.

> 5. Due to the lack of structure in chaotic time series, most algorithms struggle to find a suitable representation for normal behavior or cannot distinguish between normal and abnormal subsequences at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Due to the lack of structure in chaotic time series, most algorithms struggle to find a suitable representation for normal behavior or cannot distinguish between normal and abnormal subsequences at all. This class of time series is very challenging for anomaly detection algorithms and requires future work.
```

6. Anomalies on periodic time series are easier to detect than on non-periodic time series.
7. Anomaly detection on univariate time series is on average easier than on multivariate time series.

> 8. An *extremum* seems to be the easiest anomaly type and a *trend* the hardest anomaly type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. An *extremum* seems to be the easiest anomaly type and a *trend* the hardest anomaly type. Please refer to the documentation of [GutenTAG](https://github.com/HPI-Information-Systems/gutentag) for a definition of these anomaly types.
```

### Specific Findings

> 1. The relatively high overall error susceptibility – despite our strong investment into each implementation – shows that every practical algorithm deployment needs careful testing; only few implementations, such as *DWTMLEAD*, *KNN*, and *Subsequence LOF*, actually appear to be both robust and effective.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The relatively high overall error susceptibility – despite our strong investment into each implementation – shows that every practical algorithm deployment needs careful testing; only few implementations, such as *DWT-MLEAD*, *KNN*, and *Subsequence LOF*, actually appear to be both robust and effective.
```

2. *Frequency* and *pattern-shift* anomalies clearly separate the algorithms in ones that can (mostly distance and forecasting families) and ones that cannot (mostly reconstruction and tree families) detect them.

> 3. In summary, most reconstruction methods yielded rather bad AUC-ROC scores (around 0.5) and only some algorithms in this group, i.e., *EncDecAD* and *Donut*, can detect anomalies well across all characteristics. Forecasting and distance algorithms, on the contrary, yielded particularly good results and many of their representatives, such as *DeepAnT* and *Subsequence LOF*, are amongst the best performing algorithms in almost every characteristic. Finally, distance algorithms performed remarkably well on variance anomalies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In summary, most reconstruction methods yielded rather bad AUC-ROC scores (around 0.5) and only some algorithms in this group, i.e., *EncDec-AD* and *Donut*, can detect anomalies well across all characteristics. Forecasting and distance algorithms, on the contrary, yielded particularly good results and many of their representatives, such as *DeepAnT* and *Subsequence LOF*, are amongst the best performing algorithms in almost every characteristic. Finally, distance algorithms performed remarkably well on variance anomalies.
```

4. Most supervised and semi-supervised algorithms are amongst the slowest algorithms in our evaluation and need on average 255 ms for one data point, which is largely due to their long training times. This observation confirms similar conclusions made in related work[^JacobEtAl2021Exathlon].

> 5. Overall, neither the fastest algorithms nor the slowest algorithms delivered qualitatively good results. The algorithm with the clearly best cost/benefit ratio in our experiments is *DWTMLEAD* with an average AUC-ROC score of 83 % and an outstanding runtime of 2.2 ms per data point.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Overall, neither the fastest algorithms nor the slowest algorithms delivered qualitatively good results. The algorithm with the clearly best cost/benefit ratio in our experiments is *DWT-MLEAD* with an average AUC-ROC score of 0.83 and an outstanding runtime of 2.2 ms per data point.
```
